---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-11-12
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2020-11-12
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020-11-12-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-11-12",
        "datePublished": "2020-11-13",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-11-12",
            "endDate": "2020-11-12",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Daihei Shiohama (塩濱大平)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Jun’Ichi Yoshii"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Juliette McShane"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Cristina Mussinelli"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2020-11-12

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2020Nov/0006.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/11/12-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Gregorio Pellegrino, Matthew Chan, Matt Garrish, Daihei Shiohama (塩濱大平), Jun’Ichi Yoshii, George Kerscher, Juliette McShane, Ben Schroeter, Charles LaPierre, Marisa DeMeglio, Cristina Mussinelli

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---

**Avneesh Singh:** welcome to the first meeting of the a11y taskforce  
… focus of our call is to figure out work items  
… exciting to finally be moving to the next version of the spec  
… the spec should go to CR in nov 2021  
… FPWD should be in Feb 2021  
… today let's just discuss what we want to cover in this roughly 1 year, which are must items, and which are nice-to-have  
… i thought we might have these calls every 2 weeks  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

**Avneesh Singh:** this golden time slot is so popular, it might be hard to increase the frequency of calls to every week  
… we can revisit this later, if necessary  
… also, should we have a separate issue tracker for a11y? We will keep the same issue tracker as the epub spec wg for now  

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/)

**George Kerscher:** will there be a specific label for the a11y issues?  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes  
… Q about japanese environment? Do we need a separate group for Japanese environment?  

**Daihei Shiohama (塩濱大平):** You can coordinate with me, and then we can have a separate call  

### 1. Overview of Work Items
{: #section1}

**Avneesh Singh:** highest level priority, align spec with EU Accessibility Directive  

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/882/oj?eliuri=eli:dir:2019:882:oj](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/882/oj?eliuri=eli:dir:2019:882:oj)

**Avneesh Singh:** we already align with them, but there may be a need for some clarifying language  
… a link is provided, please have specific notice of section 3 and 4 in the document linked  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* fine for me

**Avneesh Singh:** obviously this is one of the work items  
… second item, maintaining the reading order in the nav document?  
… in epub 3.3 spec, there is no requirement that content should be aligned with the nav  
… perhaps we should make this a requirement of the a11y spec  
… another big piece is alignment with WCAG 2.1 and perhaps 2.2  
… discussion with Matt G, about different ways to do this  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** should we check what the WCAG requirements imply for epub?  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes, WCAG can be quite abstract, but this will be covered techniques document  

**Charles LaPierre:** about the EU directive... will they have any requirements about which version of WCAG will be required?  

**Avneesh Singh:** EU directive is only about functional requirements, they don't specify a specific version of WCAG  
… my understanding is that it will be preferable to align with 2.1, because if W3 makes any recommendations to EU, they will be referring to 2.1  

**Matt Garrish:** even if we formally accept one version, there will be a benefit to allowing implementers some flexibility  

### 2. URLs that point to IDPF website should be redirect to W3 website
{: #section2}

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

### 3. relaxed extended desc and long desc for images
{: #section3}

**Avneesh Singh:** 2016 version of spec relaxed extended desc and long desc for images  
… next item, 2016 version of spec relaxed extended desc and long desc for images  
… we compromised: alt-text would be sufficient even for complex images  
… we can change this now, to better align with WCAG  

**Charles LaPierre:** Agreed. In global certified accessible, we see that a lot more publishers are putting extended desc and long desc into their books  
… its become a requirement for our certification  

**George Kerscher:** This seems to be very prevalent among higher ed, where books might have 100+ such complex images  
… should should try to balance this so that we don't go overboard with making such publishers do lots of work  

> *George Kerscher:* +1 to what Matt said

### 4. `epub:type` for semantics vs aria-roles
{: #section4}

**Avneesh Singh:** should we deprecate use of `epub:type` and move completely to aria-roles  

**Charles LaPierre:** with global certified accessible, we originally required both, but after consultation, we realized that `epub:type` wasn't really used for a11y, more for production workflow  
… so i'm in favor of not requiring `epub:type`, but publishers can still have it if they want  

### 5. multiple certifiercredentials, accessibility API, accessibility controls
{: #section5}

**Avneesh Singh:** there are also outdated links to IDPF forum, which is now gone  

**Charles LaPierre:** re. a11y metadata, some of these metadata elements are confusing publishers  
… i'm in favor of not requiring these  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** right now spec requires Schema inside the epub, but maybe we can just refer to ONIX instead  
… re. mapping between aria and `epub:type`, more work needs to be done?  

**Avneesh Singh:** we can keep the mapping as part of the role of the community group  

### 6. overlap with media-overlay spec
{: #section6}

**Avneesh Singh:** last item, revisit overlap with media-overlay spec. Do we want to add some requirements in this section?  
… right now we don't have this as a very high priority work item  
… or perhaps we can take up this specific item later?  

**George Kerscher:** there are implementations of MO books that are fixed-layout only. This is pretty common.  
… i wonder if there are ways to indicate that even if the audio doesn't play, the epub should still be readable for people with disabilities  

**Matt Garrish:** a lot of work in the MO section will hinge on implementation, on the actual content that is being produced  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think we can make add a comment in the spec to address george's concern  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** right now `epub:type` MAY be attached to MO elements, this is what drives the skipability-feature  
… if we're changing `epub:type` to role then we'll have to revisit this  

**Avneesh Singh:** okay, are we missing any other work items?  
… no? Then it looks like everyone is happy with the plan.  

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html)

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y-tech/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y-tech/index.html)

**George Kerscher:** about the division of labor between the cg and the wg... e.g. getting support of dpub aria roles  
… this feels more like a cg job  

**Avneesh Singh:** the wg's timeline is very short, we should focus on improving the spec  
… other things can be delegated  

**Charles LaPierre:** re. deprecating `epub:type`, 1. do we need to improve roles to allow skipability, and 2. do we need to consult with publishers who are right now using `epub:type` for skipability?  

**Avneesh Singh:** roles already allow skipabilty/escapability  

**Matt Garrish:** we want to be careful where we touch upon the MO spec, we might even just want to leave references to `epub:type` for this section  

**George Kerscher:** read aloud could benefit from these clarifications to enriched skipability/escapability, which is another point towards moving towards aria roles  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** in the future updates to MO, we are very much relying upon aria roles  

**George Kerscher:** we should also thinking about a11y aspects of video, time permitting  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think these things are mainly covered by WCAG  
… because our time is short, we should limit our scope to updating what is in the spec  

**Matt Garrish:** agreed that this is more an issue for the cg, or best practices document  

**Avneesh Singh:** re. alignment to EU accessibility directive. We should go through the directive requirements and see that our spec meets all those requirements  
… will Cristina take over this responsibility?  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** okay, yes  

**Avneesh Singh:** I will get in touch with you early next week about this  

**George Kerscher:** So in this work item, we are identifying incongruencies between our spec and EU directive?  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes, exactly  

**George Kerscher:** Are we going to publish guidance on how our spec differs from the EU directive in the future?  

**Avneesh Singh:** This is probably not within our scope  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** Are there any US-based requirements that we should also check, while we checking the EU directive?  
… as the spec would apply to everyone, this would be useful to know  

**Avneesh Singh:** sure  
… next, alignment between nav and content, I'll open an issue about this and we can discuss there  
… and re. WCAG versions, we can continue to discuss this in future meetings  

**George Kerscher:** So to clarify, our meetings will be every other week, at this time?  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes, and maybe we'll revisit this meeting schedule after a couple of months  

**Avneesh Singh:** okay, thanks for coming everyone!

---
