---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-05-13
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-05-13
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-05-13-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-05-13",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-05-13",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-05-13",
            "endDate": "2021-05-13",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-05-13

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021May/0028.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/05/13-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Matt Garrish, George Kerscher, Wendy Reid, Matthew Chan, Tzviya Siegman, Ben Schroeter, Gregorio Pellegrino, Charles LaPierre

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Quick update on progress of explainer document for EU.
{: #section1}

**Avneesh Singh:** gpellegrino, cristina and luc have put together structure for explainer doc for EU  
… component for metadata, and for how spec was developed  
… this has been sent to EU, and we expect to receive feedback by next week  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** it is only an informal outline right now to check if structure is okay  

**George Kerscher:** how long is the outline?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** not sure, cristina sent it  

**Tzviya Siegman:** eager for the rest of us to be able to see it!  

**Avneesh Singh:** we will share once we receive feedback  

### 2. Add voicing when TTS of titles is not reliable 
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1288](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1288)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1288 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** summarizing discussion up to now in issue, we don't think many RS support this feature right now  
… we propose adding this to best practices, and if we see uptake, we then add to techniques document at that point  

**Matt Garrish:** key is that we need to show implementation  
… proves practical benefit over theoretical use  

**George Kerscher:** would this be in metadata or body?  

**Matt Garrish:** in the package metadata  
… so you can use the refines attribute with link element to point to audio file of title/author names  

**Avneesh Singh:** so we will wait for mokoto's feedback  

### 3. alttext for cover image 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1300](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1300)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1300 -->



**Matt Garrish:** we discussed this too in web publication, publication manifest  
… cover img are sometimes used in contexts without html wrapper  
… how to do this in package?  
… one way is to add an alt-text attribute  
… or we could use refines attribute and setup property name, refines could then point the additional metadata field at cover  
… but which is more effective?  
… each has its pros and cons  

**Avneesh Singh:** whatever our group decides will become a recommendation to WG, not only our decision  

**Charles LaPierre:** if we did the refines method, for the cases where you have cover img in XHTML wrapper (with full alt-text), would that then be duplicated in the package?  
… are we worried about that duplication?  

**Matt Garrish:** yeah, that's one of the downsides  
… will be duplication between whatever is in package and what is in XHTML  
… and then you'd have to maintain it in two locations  
… i was just thinking that maybe a pointer into the document could potentially be a 3rd option  
… but yes, could potentially be duplicative, depending on which method we choose  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1 to pointing to existing image description

**Avneesh Singh:** it would be nice to have a simpler solution  

**George Kerscher:** so this is used in the bookshelf view (e.g. reading through list of books and this information comes up), as opposed to opening the book and reading it there  
… two completely different purposes  
… not sure if it would be voiced twice by AT  
… some people have also complained about cases where only the text of the cover is conveyed to AT, but the rest of the cover detail isn't  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** we will also need best practices for how to implement this  
… in a library view, it might be too verbose to have a description of the cover spoken every time  

**Wendy Reid:** the challenge for RS would be surfacing this data  
… in the bookshelf view/gallery view, i think most RS are just using title and author  
… this is same situation for store carousel  
… even with alt-text inside book we don't often get detailed desc  
… like with frontlist titles, covers get updated often (for awards, for movie tie-in covers)  
… can see publishers not keeping this up to date  

**Tzviya Siegman:** would there be different descriptions for the actual cover and the thumbnail cover?  
… as a sighted user, I don't process the info in a thumbnail the same way i process the cover in a full view  
… so for the pointer based solution, we might not want the description of a thumbnail to be the same as the description inside  
… for the books that I work on, where the textbook covers aren't that exciting, its likely that we'd just want to present basic title/author  

**George Kerscher:** there's a benefit of alt-text over the refines method, as alt-text is pretty well known these days  
… alt-text is intended to be brief  
… and then when the user opens the book to the cover, that's where more detailed desc can be used  

**Charles LaPierre:** in Canada there is a pilot right now to help publishers create alt-text  
… the view there is that alt-text for the cover in the book should be more than just title/author  
… we probably don't need all that in the package metadata  
… so maybe refines is better from that perspective  

**Matt Garrish:** kind of worried now if we also call this alt-text we will sow confusion  
… we also don't want to compel people to put this metadata into the package even where it isn't needed if we call it alt-text  

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

**Avneesh Singh:** important to have a short desc for the bookshelf view, and a more detailed desc for inside  

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

**Tzviya Siegman:** have we looked into how each of these different methods of approaching this works with AT?  

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1 ask RS dev. Thorium Bookshelf etc.

**Wendy Reid:** would like to get feedback from RS developers about how this could be done  

**George Kerscher:** when RS developers display this information, they would probably be using the img element with alt-text  
… so if we had alt-text available for them, they could just copy the alt-text over along with the img  

### 4. Path forward for sound hazard 
{: #section4}

_See github issue [#1302](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1302)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1302 -->



> *Avneesh Singh:* some pointers to some parameters for reference:

> *Avneesh Singh:* See [CDC document](https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hearing_loss/what_noises_cause_hearing_loss.html#:~:text=Sound%20is%20measured%20in%20decibels,immediate%20harm%20to%20your%20ears.)

> *Avneesh Singh:* See [Audiology document](https://audiology-web.s3.amazonaws.com/migrated/niohlprevention.pdf_53996fb4c1ca13.61907521.pdf)

**Matt Garrish:** the sound hazard isn't actually tied to a specific testable outcome  
… there are sound patterns that cause seizures, but not sure if there is any standard for testing for that  
… changes in loudness can also cause issues  
… right now we have a property called sound that isn't specific to anything  
… what i put in the tracker after is whether we should move away from "sound" towards descriptors of the hazards that can be caused by sound  
… e.g. loudness  
… e.g. buzzing  
… might be more testable  
… my concern is that this would be coming from epub a11y spec WG, when maybe we should just be referring out to some other standard  
… not sure if we should try to rush something into this revision timeline  
… or if we should be looking into this more deeply, consulting other experts, etc.  

**Tzviya Siegman:** before we add this we should refer this to AG group  

**Avneesh Singh:** i have emailed them  
… but it would help if you and George can elevate it with them  

**George Kerscher:** we can bring it up, yes, but in a way that makes it clear that we don't want to drive it  
… i'd be happy to close this issue for now  

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1 to waiting

**Matt Garrish:** i'm not an expert, but from what i've read it seems like the hazard is very subjective to the individual  
… that's why i'm not sure how easy it is to test for something like this  
… makes it especially difficult  

**Charles LaPierre:** maybe having the umbrella category of sound is the best we can do for now  

**Avneesh Singh:** don't think that this issue is specific to epub, the vocab is from Schema, and the expertise necessary to develop it has to come from a11y experts in this field  

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

**Avneesh Singh:** action item for George and tzviya to raise it with WAI and AG  

### 5. Closing issues 1590 and 1434
{: #section5}

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1590](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1590)

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1434](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1434)

**Avneesh Singh:** are there any comments on these?  

### 6. AOB?
{: #section6}

**Avneesh Singh:** wendyreid is there a conflict with our call on the 27th?  

**Wendy Reid:** the WG call is going to be in the evening eastern time  
… so no  

**Avneesh Singh:** that is a relief  
… okay, thank you everyone!  

---
