---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-04-06
title: EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — 2021-04-06
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-04-06-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-04-06",
        "irc": "epub-fxl",
        "datePublished": "2021-05-04",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-04-06",
            "endDate": "2021-04-06",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ken Jones"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laura Brady"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Rachel Osolen"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Will Awad"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-04-06

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Mar/0003.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/05/04-epub-fxl-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** George Kerscher, Wendy Reid, Ken Jones, Gregorio Pellegrino, Laura Brady, Matthew Chan, Charles LaPierre, Rachel Osolen, Brady Duga, Will Awad

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Wendy Reid:** hi everyone, let's start with updates from what we did last week  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/fxl-a11y/](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/fxl-a11y/)

**Wendy Reid:** biggest update is that we now have a document in github  
… basically a skeleton version of the note, that we can now edit on there  
… please make your contributions via github PRs  
… or you can submit the text via email and someone will make the PR for you  
… its in a very early state right now  
… if sections are empty, then they don't appear  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://kb.daisy.org/publishing/docs/contribute/](https://kb.daisy.org/publishing/docs/contribute/)

**Wendy Reid:** re. updates to Daisy KB  
… mgarrish refers us to that link  
… he is not very strict about it, so go ahead and open issues or file PRs  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** i tried to figure out what were the coolest new CSS and HTML features for accessible FXL epubs  
… CSS flexbox, CSS grid, CSS media-queries  
… trying to create some epubs that mix FXL and reflow, which is enabled via the specs, but not widely supported by RS or implemented  
… using ARIA attributes to pull reflowable things from an FXL page  

**Ken Jones:** talking with Lars from Colibrio, and he mentioned that the synced media group were working on doing panning and zooming within a page, like for comic books  
… their project is tied into audio, but it might also be useful for us  

**George Kerscher:** the epubtest.org site now has its 90 day work plan up, including an item for an experimental epub  
… so we can start doing some AT testing with that  

**Charles LaPierre:** the epubtest.org test books are in a very specific format  
… i'd be happy to take the experimental book that we create here and create the test-version of the book  
… and write the test cases  

**Ken Jones:** at the moment if an FXL epub is given to an AT screen reader, what happens?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** i didn't test it, but usually AT intercepts HTML  
… so what the user gets is the actual HTML content  
… another set of AT are magnifiers, in which case you get a zoomed view  

**Charles LaPierre:** we work with a children's reading project who are retrofitting children's books  
… books are basically image with a text box  
… we basically just added alt-text to the page  

**George Kerscher:** i've had some of the titles read out text, but it wasn't clear whether it was alt-text being read or text in the content  
… if the content text is in the correct reading order that should be pretty easy to read  
… text in images is a different (worse) matter, of course  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** here in ITA, we've also asked publishers for sample content  
… our big publisher may give us some content, but he's asked us what our policies are  
… something that he can show authors etc.  
… about how their content will be used, where it will be used  
… he also asked if we will use some kind of DRM, but I already told him "no"  

**Wendy Reid:** okay, I'll look into that  
… I asked business group last week if publishers were interested in sharing content  
… Lisa (PRH) said that they were looking into a way to get a document where structure is legit, but the content would be lorem ipsom  

**Laura Brady:** Groundwood Books can donate chunks of picture books, graphic novels, MO books  
… no DRM required  

**Will Awad:** I have asked contact in Dubai to send sample of arabic book  

**Charles LaPierre:** do we have any folks representing JP publishers on the business group who can submit samples of manga?  

**Wendy Reid:** good idea. I'll ask.  

**George Kerscher:** you can mention that just portions of a book would be good enough  

**Wendy Reid:** we probably just need like a sample that they would put up on a publisher website  
… and i'll also try to come up with some sort of quasi-legal text about how we will use  
… so now that we have documentation, we just have to do the work of updating it  
… i believe we've had people offer to work on best practices document. Ken and Rachel.  

**Ken Jones:** i've just about finished the FXL reading order article  
… wendyreid can you review for tone and language?  
… basically built off of what I've already written. Using some images as well, assuming that is okay.  

**Wendy Reid:** with a note we don't have to be as strict with the tone  

**Rachel Osolen:** i got some work done on accessible tables, and on accessibility metadata  
… in the past we were talking about adding metadata for a11y, is that still something we're thinking of?  

**Charles LaPierre:** yes, in accessibilityFeatures. Probably not adding any hazards  
… right now its just a wiki page based off of work Benetech did a while back  

**George Kerscher:** `accessModeSufficient = textual` means all content can be consumed via text  
… if content contains images with alt-text, does that pass?  
… even if that book can't be zoomed?  

**Charles LaPierre:** from my understanding (based on Madeline Rothberg), as long as the alt-text has any text that is in the image, plus an extended desc of the image itself (if that is relevant), then accessMode sufficient = textual is okay  
… for picture books, `accessModeSufficient = visual` is correct  
… and then books that have a combination of text and images described by alt-text would be accessMode sufficient = visual, textual  

**Wendy Reid:** so I'd assume that for many FXL it would be "visual, textual"  

**Ken Jones:** so for "visual, textual", does the entire content have to be consumable via each of them individually? or via the two modes in conjunction?  

**George Kerscher:** i think the clearest way to do this is by having multiple accessMode sufficient statements  

**Wendy Reid:** maybe we can run this section of our doc by madeline once we have it more complete  
… but going back to Rachel_Osolen's question, "yes" we can add metadata values  
… if there is a compelling enough reason to do so  

**Rachel Osolen:** so for now do I just say "we suggest that we expand the Schema"?  

**Wendy Reid:** you can put that in an editorial note  

**George Kerscher:** like gpellegrino said, there is AT that does magnification independent of content (e.g. make a picture biggest and pan around it)  
… but normally when we think of reflow, we think of low-vision folks changing font size and making the visual adjustments of the text  
… when we are making accessibility claims in our metadata, should we consider that zoomed panning acceptable?  

**Wendy Reid:** i wonder if you should raise that with the epub a11y TF  

**George Kerscher:** it's a horrible reading experience  
… and with the EUAA, that's going to be a big big deal  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** it is the same user experience you have with PDFs, and the EUAA requires that the user can change font, size, and different design options to accommodate his disability  

**Ken Jones:** I think that's what `accessModeSufficient = textual` should mean  
… i think we should just say that FXLs are normally visual documents, and only become textual if they can do all those things that gpellegrino said  

**Charles LaPierre:** i wonder if we could have an FXL where the text was resizable  

**George Kerscher:** there's an accessibility feature about transformability?  

**Charles LaPierre:** yes, so that's the one that refers to resizing text, etc.  

**George Kerscher:** so the combination of `accessMode = textual + transformability`, results in `accessModeSufficient = textual`?  

**Charles LaPierre:** no, I don't think transformability comes into accessMode sufficient  

**George Kerscher:** but FXL is incompatible with transformability, yes?  
… i think we can get reading order, and I think we can get AT to read the text, but unclear what to do about low-vision  
… same thing with learning disabilities (need for personalized font, etc.)  
… this is getting to the heart of what we are trying to figure out here  
… (and the EUAA)  

**Rachel Osolen:** this is why I think we should add more to the Schema for metadata  
… to make it more clear what FXL can and can't do  

**Ken Jones:** what about metadata for the type of screen size that would be best for the content  

**Charles LaPierre:** about transformability for dyslexia, there has been research that says that the reader just needs to get used to the font  
… just being able to change the font, even if the size remains the same, would be helpful  

**George Kerscher:** unless we can come up with a way to have a parallel HTML presentation I think we're running up against a big problem here  
… like with multiple renditions  

**Wendy Reid:** if the HTML is good, the page itself is what you are referring to  

**Rachel Osolen:** when I train people on how best to write code for accessibility, I stress proper HTML  
… and the other thing I wanted to mention was proper use of colour  

**Brady Duga:** Ken_Jones had an idea a while back about transforming FXL into reflow epub  
… an algorithmic solution  
… which would give us all the a11y benefits of reflow  
… I think we eventually referred this idea to the CG  
… if EUAA is on the horizon, then we have to start speccing that today  
… but it seems like something like that would solve a lot of our problems  

**Ken Jones:** i think we need to get away from the idea of changing the FXL, like changing the font, because i can't see that ever becoming popular  
… as soon as you go down that path you end up with badly designed FXLs that are probably still not very accessible  

**Wendy Reid:** let me take this away, since it gets into questions of charter, etc.  
… for those that have tasks about adding to/updating documentation, please share with the group via PR or email  
… for the experiments, lay claim to the ones you are interested in and go wild  
… ditto for the updates to the Daisy KB (and remember that Ken has already started that work with his outline)  
… AOB?  
… okay, thanks everyone, we'll reconvene next week!  

---
