---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-06-10
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2021-06-10
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-06-10-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-06-10",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2021-06-11",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-06-10",
            "endDate": "2021-06-10",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dan Lazin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "Remove PLS section from the authoring document, close issue 1690"
            },
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 2,
                "resolution_text": "Absolute URLs for manifest items should have a special scheme that is not `file:`, close issue 1688"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2021-06-10

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Jun/0024.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/06/10-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Toshiaki Koike, Matthew Chan, Masakazu Kitahara, Wendy Reid, Dave Cramer, Shinya Takami (高見真也), Matt Garrish, Ben Schroeter, Dan Lazin, Marisa DeMeglio

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Dave Cramer

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Removing the PLS section 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1690](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1690)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1690 -->



**Matt Garrish:** basically we created this for 3.0 without W3C input, and as it turns out there hasn't been wide uptake  
… if we really want this to work it shouldn't be the epub content document spec  
… is it time to remove this until there is some real world implementation? possibly after taking this to W3C  

**Dave Cramer:** so the spec text basically just describes how to use the link element, which is really an HTML thing, not an epub specific thing  
… do we keep statements about these things not requiring fallbacks?  

**Matt Garrish:** we already say link element doesn't need fallback, nothing changes by cutting this  

**Dave Cramer:** yes, i'm also concerned about people seeing this and thinking that it does more than it really will  

**Matt Garrish:** right, and if we really want this to work, we should take it from here and make a standard for it, or turn it into a note  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** good in theory, but i've never seen it used in the wild  

**Matt Garrish:** there are also other avenues to pursue to get to the same goal, parts of ARIA for example  

> **Proposed resolution: Remove PLS section from the authoring document, close issue 1690** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Masakazu Kitahara:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Remove PLS section from the authoring document, close issue 1690***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Dave Cramer:** do we need to have the CG look at it? No?  

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* [https://www.w3.org/TR/2021/WD-spoken-html-20210518/](https://www.w3.org/TR/2021/WD-spoken-html-20210518/)

**Wendy Reid:** if any issues come up, we can redirect to one of the WG or CG that are working on this already  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** interesting work done with SSML in HTML  

### 2. URLs and the package document 
{: #section2}

_See github issue [#1681](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1681), [#1374](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1374), [#1688](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1688), [#1686](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1686)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1681 w3c/epub-specs/1374 w3c/epub-specs/1688 w3c/epub-specs/1686 -->



**Dave Cramer:** this is a bunch of issues that revolve around how you interpret URLs in the package document, especially if they're absolute URLs  
… came from an issue in epubcheck  
… and there's also an older issue about what the IRI of the package document is  
… or what if there are file scheme URLs in the manifest  
… and what happens if two URLs resolve to the same item in the manifest?  

**Matt Garrish:** in epubcheck there was a root-relative URL that caused an error, and that spawned all of this  
… e.g. "/something/thing"  
… so what is the root of the epub?  
… to me it doesn't make sense that we even allow these root-relative URLs  
… the root differs based on the RS  
… and Romain mentioned that we require that all resources resolve to something inside container, but depending on what RS does, there is even ambiguity about what that even is  

**Dave Cramer:** in issue 1688 Romain he suggests that manifest items should have one of the special schemes (_**except**_ `file:`)  

**Matt Garrish:** there are edge cases where file scheme items make sense, but not generally for epub  

**Dave Cramer:** it goes against epub as a portable format, and the file scheme ties the epub to a specific file system  
… how much out there does have file URLs on purpose, not by accident?  

**Matt Garrish:** never heard of one  
… and they'd end up being remote resources  

**Dave Cramer:** okay, so what if we just say no file URLs in epub?  
… what is the risk that we break something?  
… maybe this is something where we try to enforce it and see if anyone complains  

**Matt Garrish:** most RS probably won't do anything with file URL  
… probably security concern  

**Wendy Reid:** depending on platform you might not even be able to access parts of the file system (e.g. iOS apps)  

**Dave Cramer:** can we start by resolving on this point from 1688?  

> **Proposed resolution: Absolute URLs for manifest items should have a special scheme that is not `file:`, close issue 1688** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Toshiaki Koike:* +1

> *Shinya Takami (高見真也):* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> ***Resolution #2: Absolute URLs for manifest items should have a special scheme that is not `file:`, close issue 1688***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

**Dan Lazin:** is there a use case for some of these other schemes? Why would you have an FTP in your epub?  

**Matt Garrish:** if we go too far, do we prevent future stuff? will we have to come back and re-add this in the future?  
… FTP kind of fits within the web framework  
… maybe we just leave it to authors to stick with HTTP, HTTPS, etc.  

**Ben Schroeter:** is the idea that if we disallow file scheme, then we also disallow "slash URLs"?  

**Matt Garrish:** not sure those are the same  
… i think 1681 is contingent on us forcing RS to unpack epub in a certain way  
… otherwise we can't say there is a single consistent root that can be referenced  
… and we don't tell RS how/where to unpack right now  
… this kind of came up 5 years ago with multiple rendition, but we left it buried in the discussions we had  

**Dave Cramer:** what would be the consequences of forbidding root-relative paths?  

**Matt Garrish:** not sure there are any, because epubcheck had forbidden these until a recent update  
… we're reasonably safe from backwards compatibility point of view  

**Dave Cramer:** and this is just for href on manifest?  

**Matt Garrish:** no, this would be anywhere, e.g. in content docs too  
… all the "../" stuff would still be okay  
… i proposed somewhere that we say all content must be below the packat document  
… if we could enforce an authoring requirement that made a root, then we could enforce these relative paths  
… but maybe its cleaner to just disallow them  

**Dan Lazin:** do we support the base tag?  
… and does that have implications for the handling of these issues?  

**Dave Cramer:** we've been phasing out `xml:base`, its been forbidden from package file for example  

**Dan Lazin:** the base tag allows you to define what the relative path is relative to  
… so if we're allowing or disallowing certain types of URLs, maybe we should take a stance on base too  
… not sure what stance though  

**Matt Garrish:** base would force you to have all external resources, right? It exists, but I don't imagine anyone really going there  

> *Dan Lazin:* [https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/base](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/base)

**Marisa DeMeglio:** there was a resolution a few weeks ago about dumping `xml:base` from the spec  

**Dave Cramer:** and that's separate from the HTML base element  
… i think i just want to say no root-relative URLs  

**Dan Lazin:** if you set base to some website, and then use root-relative URLs, your URLs would appear to be relative, when they are actually absolute  
… but maybe that's too far of a stretch  

**Dave Cramer:** but can we really say anything about base because its part of HTML?  

**Matt Garrish:** so you must not use root-relative URLs unless you use a base?  
… but it also applies to SVGs, to the package document...  

**Dan Lazin:** what was the harm in not banning root-relative?  

**Matt Garrish:** because the RS might treat zip root as the root, but they could also treat location of package doc as root  
… so no consistent root  

**Dan Lazin:** maybe permit it, but use _SHOULD NOT_?  
… is it acceptable for an author to write an epub for a specific RS?  
… and where it has undefined behavior for other RS  
… probably acceptable, right?  

**Dave Cramer:** yes, e.g. with books that only work with iBooks because of scripting support  

**Matt Garrish:** maybe just a note that root-relative could cause issues if authors use it?  

**Dave Cramer:** so does that mean that there are epubs that could be built to work in some RS, but expose an interop issue if opened in another RS?  

**Matt Garrish:** right  
… usually this happens in epubs that try to go from one folder to a sibling folder  
… but when all content is below the package document its fine  
… but we don't specify that right now, only that content must be below the root  

**Dave Cramer:** not sure what the right course of action is, but maybe we can continue this another time with Romain present  

**Wendy Reid:** we need RS people here on next call that know exactly what RSes are doing right now  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** one of the github threads has a sample, but I wasn't able to download it  
… maybe if we wrote to the mailing list Romain could provide samples  
… would also love to have a list of epubs that must absolutely continue to work  

> *Dan Lazin:* I have filed [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1699](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1699)

**Matt Garrish:** also, there's not much hand authoring, and most tools will put all the content into one folder  
… we only ran into an issue with this with multiple renditions, and that hasn't really gone anywhere  
… so is this maybe more of a theoretical issue  

### 3. AOB?
{: #section3}

**Wendy Reid:** the agenda item about the a11y note is postponed  

**Dave Cramer:** and a reminder that we have TFs  

**Wendy Reid:** locators TF has slightly changed times  
… moved to the same week, but friday at 10 am  
… eastern time  
… boston  

**Dan Lazin:** do we know what the fallback algorithms are in JP RS?  
… in most RS we're familiar with, they have a proprietary way of counting position  
… e.g. every 1000 bytes, or every 1024 bytes of the zipped file size  
… would love to know what JP RS are doing  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** I'll encourage JP RS people to join the TF  

**Ben Schroeter:** i think there's an issue with the TF invite  

**Wendy Reid:** okay, i'll fix  

> *Dave Cramer:* RRSAgent: bye

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Remove PLS section from the authoring document, close issue 1690
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Absolute URLs for manifest items should have a special scheme that is not `file:`, close issue 1688