---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-03-11
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-03-11
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-03-11-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-03-11",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-03-12",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-03-11",
            "endDate": "2021-03-11",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Cristina Mussinelli"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Juliette McShane"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laurent Le Meur"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "make distribution section non-normative and place a note that it is required by EU accessibility act"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-03-11

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Mar/0003.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/03/11-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Juliette McShane, Teenya Franklin, Gregorio Pellegrino, Matt Garrish, Tzviya Siegman, Ben Schroeter, Cristina Mussinelli, Charles LaPierre, Bill Kasdorf, Laurent Le Meur

**Regrets:** George Kerscher

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Cristina Mussinelli, Gregorio Pellegrino

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html)

**Matt Garrish:** I have done a restructuring on the document  
… restructure the different section to make the different section clearer  
… it may be useful if people can look at the revised document and verify it there is space for improvements  

### 1. distribution 
{: #section1}

_See github issue [#1487](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1487)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1487 -->



> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-distribution](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-distribution)

**Avneesh Singh:** there are some questions on the distribution section  
… this section was added to be in line with the European Accessibility Act highlighting that it is not a normative section  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** we can do as in WCAG as a note where is highlighted that is not normative and it may be only for some legislation in some countries  

**Matt Garrish:** worry as DRM is always an problematic issue in specs  
… this is one reason to avoid including it  

**Bill Kasdorf:** the ways it actually stated that authors must not impose restrictions while restrictions are implemented by distributors  

**Matt Garrish:** there are features of DRM that authors or publishers can add and it is important do highlight this issue  

**Tzviya Siegman:** as it it a requirement of EEA Gregorio may you clarify what is required by the EEA  

> **Proposed resolution: make distribution section non-normative and place a note that it is required by EU accessibility act** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Laurent Le Meur:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* 0

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* 0

> ***Resolution #1: make distribution section non-normative and place a note that it is required by EU accessibility act***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. Update on EAA
{: #section2}

**Cristina Mussinelli:** Me and Luc Audrain had a meeting with all the responsible member states  
… for implementing the EAA  
… we told them the status of the art of EPUB and Accessibility  
… they asked us a document, we are producing it telling that standards are already available  
… that guidelines for accessibility are there, ecc.  
… also writing the consensus process we have for approving the specs  
… this should be a good option to prevent the creation of a new standard  
… (harmonized standard from the EU)  

**Tzviya Siegman:** do you have input about publishers that are not using EPUB? (e.g. scholar publishers)  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** there may be problems with PDFs  

**Tzviya Siegman:** Yes, I think there may be problems with a11y metadata in PDFs  
… I had a meeting with STM (other publishers) and I would love to have a common solution for accessibility metadata in PDFs  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** for sure we can work on the document  

**Avneesh Singh:** We will present EPUB Accessibility Guidelines + Schema.org + ONIX  
… to the EU commission  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** we would like to create this document in about one month  

### 3. Media Overlays section is updated 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1458](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1458)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1458 -->



**Avneesh Singh:** The requirement of logical reading order is removed from main EPUB 3.3 Media Overlays specs, and placed in EPUB Accessibility.

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-mo](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-mo)

**Matt Garrish:** the issue is: does the specs have to be so strict on the reading order for MO?  
… there are situations where you can have multiple ways to read the same content  
… the solution is to remove the requirement of following the reading order  
… from the main specs  

**Avneesh Singh:** maybe we can add the requirement from MO to follow the reading order in the EPUB accessibility guidelines  

**Matt Garrish:** I think that in different cases you can have multiple ways to read the content  

**Avneesh Singh:** my question came from WCAG where following the reading order is a requirement  
… since MO is an alternative for the screenreader, maybe we have to think about this requirement  

**Matt Garrish:** yes, I understand  

**Bill Kasdorf:** my question is about skippability in publications that don't have a particular reading order, like reference and legal publications  
… if I look for a particular paragraph I want to get there  

### 4. pages related issues 
{: #section4}

_See github issue [#1503](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1503), [#1502](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1502), [#1501](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1501), [#1500](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1500), [#1542](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1542)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1503 w3c/epub-specs/1502 w3c/epub-specs/1501 w3c/epub-specs/1500 w3c/epub-specs/1542 -->


**Matt Garrish:**: Updated EPUB accessibility for addressing a part of the following static pages issues. Some requirements can be addressed by EPUB Accessibility while others should go to best practices.

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-page-nav](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html#sec-page-nav)

**Matt Garrish:** we had different questions about pagelists  
… one propose is to structure the requirements for pagelists  
… e.g. level A: some pages in the pagelist  
… level AA: all content pages linked in pagelist  
… level AAA: all pages (no exclusion, even blank pages)  
… I didn't move over with my requirements  

**Avneesh Singh:** I don't think these issues can be added in the guidelines, maybe the best place is best practices  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we had similar in PDFs with "this page intentionally left blank", where we left blank pages for starting the chapters on page right  
… I think that marking blank pages can be really confusing  
… maybe we can use ARIA  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes, but then someone will say that ARIA is not only for AT  

**Charles LaPierre:** I'm not sure if Read Aloud by the Reading system can get that information  

**Matt Garrish:** for sure we can investigate the use of ARIA label or something similar  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think this task force should focus on the requirements Matt put in the issues  
… we can go through the issue tracker  
… and discuss there  

**Matt Garrish:** we have a issue about the ordering of the pagelist  
… if I have the pages moved in the digital version, what happen to the pagelist?  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I have several examples of this  

**Avneesh Singh:** I think for AT users it would be useful to have an alert  

**Charles LaPierre:** maybe we can put in in the accessibility summary (metadata), but do we need to have some requirements for reading systems?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** maybe something like play order attribute in NCX tocs  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): make distribution section non-normative and place a note that it is required by EU accessibility act
