---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-06-10
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-06-10
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-06-10-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-06-10",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-06-10",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-06-10",
            "endDate": "2021-06-10",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Cristina Mussinelli"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                }
            ]
        },
        "resolution": [
            {
                "@type": "Resolution",
                "resolution_number": 1,
                "resolution_text": "approve request in issue #1695"
            }
        ]
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-06-10

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Jun/0022.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/06/10-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Wendy Reid, Matthew Chan, Charles LaPierre, Gregorio Pellegrino, Bill Kasdorf, Cristina Mussinelli, George Kerscher, Matt Garrish, Tzviya Siegman

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. Explainer document for the european union representatives.
{: #section1}

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://www.fondazionelia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/20210609_european_accessibility_act_report_on_the_state_of_the_art_of_publishing_standards.pdf](https://www.fondazionelia.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/20210609_european_accessibility_act_report_on_the_state_of_the_art_of_publishing_standards.pdf)

**Avneesh Singh:** cristina, gpellegrino, and luc updated this doc, and gpellegrino sent today  
… feedback from community has been incorporated  
… if the Explainer has to be updated based on our discussion of the table, gpellegrino can do this  
… in the last section, we are explaining how standards are developed with openness, etc.  
… is there a need to explain similar process for Schema metadata  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** we decided to leave the table within the document even if the table exists elsewhere to make it more simple for commission  
… if there are just minor changes to the document, we don't need to update the commission, this can be quite static now  
… and we refer to Schema as W3C managed, but we're open to change in language if you want  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** can mgarrish help us with language to describe how Schema is managed?  
… and we don't explicitly say that those spec are from Schema  

> *Avneesh Singh:* we are discussing heading of Compliance with ICT TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS regulation (Annex II of 1025) in the document

**Cristina Mussinelli:** what is relevant from point of view of the commission is that the standard is managed, open (not copyrighted), and that there is a community around it  
… and that there is no already existing European standard  

**Matt Garrish:** it probably meets most of those, its managed on github, there are mailing lists for it  
… but it is highly controlled. Not sure that you can just join Schema.org  
… off the top of my head I don't have language to describe that  
… and even within W3C we can't cite Schema.org  
… not considered maintained by official standards organization  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** similar to Editeur  
… it might be okay for us to be vague on this, mgarrish please have a look and let us know what you think  

**Bill Kasdorf:** i think the key point is that these things were developed collaboratively  

**Charles LaPierre:** there are a handful of Schema.org properties we've introduced, and those are locked down, not changing  
… its the vocabulary that goes into those properties that have changed  
… in the CG we are trying to come up with a standardized way to introduce new values for these properties  
… and we control that  
… there's a distinction there  

**Bill Kasdorf:** yes, the properties are controlled by Schema, we specify the values  

**Avneesh Singh:** well, yes, for the accessibility values, not all the values  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** to clarify, where EUAA refers to metadata, I mapped to package metadata  

**Matt Garrish:** for a number of years we had these values on a wikipage, but there was no formal control procedure  
… we may want to find a more formal process and place for these  

**Avneesh Singh:** is there any working group for Schema.org in W3C?  

**Matt Garrish:** there's a CG  

**Avneesh Singh:** I will discuss with with people who are writing W3C process  
… back to main topic, do we have to explain how Schema.org meets the requirements of the Commission?  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1 to Matt :)

**Bill Kasdorf:** i'd trust mgarrish to make that call about the Explainer  
… but it seems the most important thing is that the same metadata is used to describe website a11y and epub a11y  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** i'm not sure the Commission will go into such detail. It is important for the document to be accurate, but I think what they really want is to be sure that the standards are already in line with EUAA, and what is already in practice  
… but yes, please, mgarrish have a look and let us know  
… and we can update the document in the future, but for the Commission I think what we have is enough  

**George Kerscher:** agreed. What we're proposing isn't controlled by some single company, not a proprietary standard  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** we've also prepared an article that we have published on LIA website, but if Inclusive Publishing wants to use it or a shortened version of it, we are okay  
… it is a less technical summary of what is in the Explainer  
… we can share link  

### 2. Mapping of the requirements of European accessibility act to EPUB Accessibility specifications.
{: #section2}

> *Avneesh Singh:* avneeshsingh: If we are satisfied with it, then we should approve sending it to whole EPUB 3 WG for approving it as working group note.

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/)

**Avneesh Singh:** can we approve in this group so that we can share with the bigger group?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** we might add more detail to the media overlay section  
… and maybe add some info about pagelists?  
… pagelists are not a requirement of EUAA, but it is a feature that can help accessibility  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/#annex-I-section-IV-f-iii](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/#annex-I-section-IV-f-iii)

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** we would add to this section  

**Avneesh Singh:** and that section is about navigation, which relates to pagelist  
… any objection to these two suggestions?  
… okay, gpellegrino please make those changes  

> *Avneesh Singh:* (iv) Allowing alternative renditions of the content and its interoperability with a variety of assistive technologies, in such a way that it is perceivable, understandable, operable and robust

**Avneesh Singh:** this is a requirement of EUAA about renditions  
… it has two parts: 1) allows rendition, and 2) interop with variety of AT  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/#annex-I-section-IV-f-iv](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/reports/eu-a11y-mapping/#annex-I-section-IV-f-iv)

**Avneesh Singh:** a number of WCAG principles address the interop point, but not necessarily the allows rendition point  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** we have a problem with this statement in EUAA, because in epub world rendition has a specific meaning  
… but in EUAA, rendition means only the ability to get the same content in different ways  
… so I didn't link directly to our rendition spec  
… especially since other specs like for PDF, HTML, they also don't have renditions in the way epub spec means  

**Avneesh Singh:** well HTML can have a link to a more accessible version of the webpage  

**Charles LaPierre:** I think we need to add more information to the headings of the mappings document, more than just the identifying section numbers  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** i had a lot of trouble making this document readable  
… in each section I want to put the entirety of the EUAA text, but that text is too long to fit  
… if you have any ideas, please let me know  

**Bill Kasdorf:** the fundamental enabling technology for this is HTML because it is designed to be rendition independent  
… and epub content is HTML  
… makes braille readers possible, etc.  

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1 I can add a note

**Tzviya Siegman:** i think the problem here is that word "rendition", and we can't change EUAA, but maybe our document can disambiguate how that term means something different in epub spec  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1 to WCAG as a whole

**Matt Garrish:** the EUAA rendition requirement is basically requiring WCAG, right?  
… I would refer to all of WCAG, instead of just particular pieces of it  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1 to mgarrish

**Avneesh Singh:** so what do we think about 1) referring to the 4 principles of WCAG, and 2) disambiguating the term rendition?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** yes, agree. I can do that.  

### 3. Review guidance on success criterion 1.3.2 
{: #section3}

_See github issue [#1695](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/issues/1695)._

<!-- issue w3c/epub-specs/1695 -->



> *Avneesh Singh:* Avneesh_: actual text is at:cvhttps://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y-tech/#access-001

**Matt Garrish:** this is about meaningful sequence of content, and meaningful sequence of documents  
… sequence of documents isn't specifically an a11y issue, it's a basic requirement for the epub to function  
… going into spine ordering and all this other stuff in this part of the Techniques might be irrelevant here  
… maybe we can just strip this stuff  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** does it also apply to the hierarchical order of the headings?  

**Matt Garrish:** I don't think that's an issue for this section, that would fall under headings  
… this is more about having the reading order matching the visual sequence of the epub  

**Avneesh Singh:** so we keep statement that the logical reading order applies across the epub, but leave out the stuff about spine, etc.  

**Charles LaPierre:** how would this affect choose your own adventure style books where you might not have a logical progression?  

**Matt Garrish:** I think that's again a separate issue  
… in that example, there's still a reading order, its just that you decide that order based on your ability to access the links  

**Tzviya Siegman:** this just explicitly spells out what most publishers do anyway, so there should be no problem with removing the example about the spine  

> **Proposed resolution: approve request in issue #1695** *(Avneesh Singh)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Matthew Chan:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Will Awad:* +1

> *Cristina Mussinelli:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +!

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: approve request in issue #1695***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 4. AOB?
{: #section4}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/#changelog](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG22/#changelog)

**Tzviya Siegman:** there's a call for review of WCAG 2.2, they are requesting comment by tomorrow, but this isn't the final round of revisions  

**Avneesh Singh:** we'll defer discussion of a11y note in the main group to next week's meeting then, since we have to make revisions  
… okay thank you everyone  

---


### 5. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): approve request in issue #1695