---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-01-21
title: EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — 2021-01-21
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-01-21-epub",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-01-21",
        "irc": "epub",
        "datePublished": "2021-01-22",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-01-21",
            "endDate": "2021-01-21",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Toshiaki Koike"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Zheng Xu (徐征)"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Masakazu Kitahara"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ryo Kuroda"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Shinya Takami (高見真也)"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc .draft_notice_needed}



**Date:** 2021-01-21

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Jan/0038.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/01/21-epub-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Toshiaki Koike, Teenya Franklin, Zheng Xu (徐征), Matthew Chan, Wendy Reid, Ben Schroeter, Marisa DeMeglio, Brady Duga, Masakazu Kitahara, Ryo Kuroda, Garth Conboy, Shinya Takami (高見真也)

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Wendy Reid:** welcome everyone. 2 items on the agenda today  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/wiki/Big-Issues-for-EPUB-3.3](https://github.com/w3c/epub-specs/wiki/Big-Issues-for-EPUB-3.3)

### 1. Scope
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** this is a list of various categories of issues we have in epub 3.3  
… some of these we've already discussed to some extent  
… we're coming to a point where we have to determine whether each of these issues meets the test of being within our scope  
… e.g. HTML serialization, should this be in 3.3? Or is it something that should be left to a later time due to the risk it poses to backwards compatibility?  

**Garth Conboy:** is there a particular issue that we want to decide on right now?  

**Wendy Reid:** no particularly, we want to understand what is high on everyone's priority list  
… which ones are important to the community that you represent, or which ones do we need to get more information about before we can decide?  
… we also want to be up front about issues that we have to move out  
… especially as we run into issues with testing, or backwards compatibility  

**Ben Schroeter:** can we run through these at a high level? i.e. a summary of each?  

**Wendy Reid:** html 5 serialization, essentially bringing html5 into the spec officially, making it live in parallel to xhtml  
… core media types, which new types do we add? how far do we take it?  
… fate of `epub:type`. We can't fully remove it, but what could we do about potentially deprecating it, or steering people away from it  
… fate of multiple renditions, we've pretty much decided  
… fate of satellite specs  
… inline formatting in nav doc  
… scripting, we've already discussed to some extent  
… origins and remote content, are somewhat related  
… complex layout, I believe this has to do with mixed modalities, no pixel values in complex layout content  
… fate of linked metadata records, something dave has been trying to test  
… fate of manifest fallback, not shown to be highly supported in testing, but which still exists  

**Ben Schroeter:** nothing jumps out as conceptually out of scope, maybe out of scope due to lack of bandwidth  

**Wendy Reid:** don't want to write anything out, but, e.g. linked metadata records and manifest fallback are not well supported, should these be lower priority?  

**Ben Schroeter:** do those satellite specs fall under our auspices?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, they are referenced in our charter, but a lot of them aren't note status (except for multiple rendition)  
… a lot of them are currently IDPF documents  
… we just want to get everything thinking in terms of this list of issues  

**Garth Conboy:** i was curious if there was anyone on this call that hasn't had a chance to express opinions on these issues  
… especially on HTML serialization  

**Wendy Reid:** we're still gathering information on that topic  
… particularly, we don't know whether Amazon and Apple have plans to support HTML5, or a desire to  

> *Teenya Franklin:* I am literally a beginner (in fact a complete beginner) on Epub and web development and honestly while I learn alot on these calls I do not know enough to express and opinion. I do however appreciate the opportunity to be a member and learn as we go.

### 2. Authoring and HTML5
{: #section2}

**Wendy Reid:** Authoring tools includes InDesign, Sigil, or even a completely custom publishing workflow that someone has developed for their indie publisher  
… we need to consider what challenge HTML5 would present to people making the tools in the tool chain  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** if you have authoring tools creating xhtml5 currently, does anything get lost if we just convert that to html5 after the fact?  

**Wendy Reid:** i would guess no...  

**Ben Schroeter:** `epub:type`?  

**Wendy Reid:** might be affected, but we want to discourage them from doing so anyway  
… someone commented on the original thread from Standard Ebooks. They convert public domain books into ebook files  
… they don't have custom tools, but they pull from standard libraries to create a tool chain  
… this person was reluctant to move towards html5 serialization because of what would be lost vs xhtml  

**Wendy Reid:** also, xhtml already contains a lot of the good things from html5, so do we even need the full thing?  

**Toshiaki Koike:** *comments in japanese*  

**Shinya Takami (高見真也):** Toshiaki Koike says he is making generation tools for epub content, for which he currently uses an xml parser  
… if we changed to html5, this would require big changes in his process  
… other publishers or vendors may be similarly impacted  

**Zheng Xu (徐征):** isn't the proposal to ADD support for html5? xhtml would still be accepted anyway  
… so this might limit the degree of the impact of html5 serialization  

**Garth Conboy:** Google uses an XML workflow, and I would expect others do as well for historical reasons  
… but that in itself is not a reason to say no  
… and a change in this direction might be helpful for other segments of tooling that are based on html5, and also for scripting  
… it would be nice if we could get input from the business group as to who wants this, and how badly?  

**Wendy Reid:** we have heard from independent publishers, as opposed to the people who make the tools that are being used in publishing  
… that was where the support for html5 serialization mostly came from  
… but we do need to have a better understanding of how existing tools would be affected, how much would need to be changed. Is it just adding an html5 parser? Or it would be more work?  

**Ben Schroeter:** are we saying that we want future epubs to be strictly html5 with no extensible markup?  

**Wendy Reid:** no, we want to take advantage of html5 flexibility and modernity  
… we're not expecting html5 files to in every epub.  
… but if we allow it, we'll probably see some of both for a very long time  

**Garth Conboy:** there is a formality to xhtml that is useful, as opposed to the tag soup that is html serialization  

**Ben Schroeter:** do we need more of in impact investigation? Input from RSes, bookstores, etc.?  
… we don't want to make assumptions and miss anything critical  

**Wendy Reid:** we've already asked RSes, pretty much, but we need input from tool makers  
… e.g., the makers of pandoc  
… also the parts of the publishing industry who haven't provided input (e.g. apple, amazon)  
… if you are in contact with people in these groups, please ask them for feedback  
… so, basically, more research before we decide  

**Garth Conboy:** one of us could probably write an email to Tess, just to ask for Apple's input  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, we're going to do that  

### 3. AOB?
{: #section3}

**Wendy Reid:** we published FPWD just over a week ago  
… it was well received  
… but we already have a number of changes since then  
… we're not ready to publish anything else yet, but as a protocol, we're going to resolve it in a meeting first  
… as opposed to any sort of automatic publishing  
… so, yes, we want your input as to when we publish  
… the next major publication is probably going to be aligned with the accessibility piece  
… we'll see you all next week everyone!  

---
