---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-04-27
title: EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — 2021-04-27
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-04-27-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-04-27",
        "irc": "epub-fxl",
        "datePublished": "2021-04-27",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-04-27",
            "endDate": "2021-04-27",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        },
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "KenJones"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Rachel Osolen"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group FXL A11y Task Force Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-04-27

See also the [Agenda]() and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/04/27-epub-fxl-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Gregorio Pellegrino, Matthew Chan, KenJones, Brady Duga, Rachel Osolen

**Regrets:** Laura Brady

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan, Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Wendy Reid:** this week the biggest thing was the outline for the best practices documentation  
… i plan on getting it into github  
… there's a respec format for WG notes  
… probably better to just do it in github directly vs doing it in G Docs and then having to translate  
… then we can use the normal issues, PRs, etc.  
… putting the outline on screen share now  
… we probably already have content for a lot of these areas  
… start with introduction (standard W3C) > purpose, challenges and limits of FXL, overview of document  
… high level topics include reading order, alt-text/extended desc, navigation (toc, section markers and landmarks), perceiving content (readability, contrast), MO, tables, a11y metadata  
… there's going to be a lot of cross-referencing between this doc and a11y 1.1/a11y techniques  

**KenJones:** i like it  
… the main one for me is tables  
… would be nice to have examples of all of these things done well  

**Matthew Chan:** Laura just confirmed with me that Anansi is going to be able to provide samples to use in this document  
… I don't think we'll have tables, but we'll have children's content  

**Wendy Reid:** i've sent email to business group to ask members if anyone would be willing to donate  
… no response yet, but we have a meeting today, we'll see  
… we're only looking for samples, so a couple of pages, nothing more than what you would see for free online  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** talked to cristina about some italian publishers we can ask  
… one publishes FXL for children, the other is a big publisher that uses FXL for print replica for books that are text driven but the authors and agents want to have same look as paper version  
… do you think this second category would be useful?  

**Wendy Reid:** i think so, there are interesting things that are done with the styling of those books  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** okay, i will check  

**Wendy Reid:** i'll get the github setup this week  
… hopefully mgarrish can give us some guidance on updating the Daisy KB  
… whether he prefers we open issues, or submit PRs directly  
… other stream of work is the experiments  
… business group is thinking right now about FXL embedded in reflowable  
… they are having that conversation today, hoping to come up with some use cases  
… our other experiment was to try out flexbox to see what we can achieve  
… gpellegrino has volunteered  
… what can we commit to getting done in the next week or two?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** is there anyone who can help us with the CSS side? using the new features?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, there are also lots of good resources out there about flexbox, etc.  
… for the outline, does anyone want to take on doing a first draft of any of those sections?  
… that we can then collaboratively sharpen up?  

**KenJones:** i'll be happy to take on some of those, don't mind which ones apart from tables  
… can you let me know which ones?  

**Rachel Osolen:** i can help with a11y metadata, but pretty much anything else too  
… also willing to help with the experiments  
… i can also find some information about the tables best practices  

**Wendy Reid:** rsosolen can do tables and a11y metadata for FXLs  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** question about experiments and javascript  
… a lot of FXL use javascript, but some RS will not support this  
… is it fine if we start without javascript, and add best practices for scripts in a second round?  
… may be too much to tackle everything all at once  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, let's see what we can do without it for now  
… KenJones can tackle reading order, navigation best practices for now  
… in the best practices  

**KenJones:** can you share an example for formatting?  

**Wendy Reid:** look at the source HTML for the epub spec, or the audiobook spec  
… it's very basic  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** there's also a guide for W3C respec somewhere  

> *Wendy Reid:* See [Respec documentation](https://respec.org/docs/)

**Wendy Reid:** here it is  
… don't worry too much about the syntax, not to difficult to go back and fix after  
… seems like we have everything we can do for now assigned  
… gpellegrino can you think of a couple ideas for experiments?  
… will make it easier to assign experiments to people in future  
… AOB?  

**KenJones:** i've got questions that I started posting to the Daisy KB, e.g. for image descriptions  
… another one, where there's a very annotated scientific image, how do we describe it? e.g. medical text with diagram of the heart  

**Wendy Reid:** i believe Daisy has guidance in the rest of the KB, e.g. in the image maps section?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** you can check diagram standard for how to describe image, and on epubtest.org there is a test for how to insert long desc in reflow epub  
… those two resources together should give you an idea of best practice for your use-case  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* [http://diagramcenter.org/table-of-contents-2.html](http://diagramcenter.org/table-of-contents-2.html)

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* [http://epubtest.org/test-books](http://epubtest.org/test-books)

**KenJones:** might a very visual document be rendered in a more textual way? i.e. converted from FXL to a reflow text  
… are we allowed to recommend that as a secondary method of consuming the content?  

**Wendy Reid:** depends how you do it. e.g. A book with mixed modalities, with a complicated map or something, and then the accompanying section just describes the same thing in text  
… we've talked about alternative renditions, but that's not supported  

**Brady Duga:** are you looking at a way of algorithmically converting FXL to reflow? (e.g. RS turns FXL cookbook into a reflow)  

**KenJones:** yes, so, like a fallback for a small screen or a screenreader  
… a secondary way of showing the same file  

**Brady Duga:** right, so changing the styling so that it works in reflow, maybe merging across page breaks in the FXL  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* media queries :)

**Wendy Reid:** so like, interchangeable style sheets, one for FXL and one for reflow  

**KenJones:** yes, and discarding the positioning style  

**Brady Duga:** I think its an interesting idea that is better than multiple renditions, it makes the content more accessible to all  
… but this might not be in scope  

**Wendy Reid:** gpellegrino mentioned media queries, but RS also support these in weird ways  
… you could do it with CSS, but what you can't do is toggling back and forth between FXL and reflow  
… e.g. Kobo uses different renders for FXL and reflow content  
… we'd have to tell RS when and how to switch  

**Brady Duga:** you could just re-open the content in the alternate renderer  
… still more simple than mixed modalities  

**Wendy Reid:** so what would be the trigger? how would an epub tell RS that feature is available in the book?  

**KenJones:** maybe if both accessMode textual and accessMode visual?  

**Brady Duga:** basically we're just marking a part of css as "for flowing mode"  
… there are also layout considerations where we want to combine FXL pages into a single flowing page  
… not that simple  
… may want to recharter if we tackle this, because it would require spec changes  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** when you produce FXL you have to give viewport info, so when you switch to reflow mode, what happens with the viewport?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes, so the epub would need to tell RS that it can switch from FXL to reflow, and when it switches to flowing mode, what RS is allowed to ignore/change from the FXL  
… so yes, this would require spec change  
… but agree that this is worth exploring  
… maybe we can suggest this to CG to do the initial experimentation  
… especially as spec is heading towards CR by the end of this year  
… i'll setup meeting with Mathias and Zheng  

**Brady Duga:** we should also make sure that people from WG are going to the CG meetings where this is discussed  

**Wendy Reid:** okay, so we all have our list of action items  
… and we'll report in on progress next week  

---
