---
layout: minutes
date: 2021-01-28
title: EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — 2021-01-28
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": [
            "https://schema.org",
            {
                "resolution": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/resolution",
                    "@context": {
                        "@vocab": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/"
                    }
                },
                "irc": {
                    "@id": "https://w3c.github.io/scribejs/vocab/irc"
                }
            }
        ],
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2021-01-28-epub-a11y",
        "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2021-01-28",
        "irc": "epub-a11y",
        "datePublished": "2021-01-29",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "accessMode": "textual",
        "accessModeSufficient": "textual",
        "encodingFormat": "text/html",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "inLanguage": "en-US",
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco",
            "startDate": "2021-01-28",
            "endDate": "2021-01-28",
            "location": {
                "@type": "VirtualLocation",
                "description": "Teleconference"
            },
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Matthew Chan"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Wendy Reid"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Cristina Mussinelli"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Luc Audrain"
                }
            ]
        }
    }

---

# EPUB 3 Working Group A11y Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}



**Date:** 2021-01-28

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-epub-wg/2021Jan/0043.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2021/01/28-epub-a11y-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Avneesh Singh, Gregorio Pellegrino, Matthew Chan, Matt Garrish, George Kerscher, Wendy Reid, Ben Schroeter, Cristina Mussinelli

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** Luc Audrain

**Chair:** Avneesh Singh

**Scribe(s):** Matthew Chan

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Avneesh Singh:** today's call is mainly for mapping EUAA  
… with epub a11y spec  

### 1. Review of mapping of EPUb Accessibility to European accessibility directive
{: #section1}

> *Avneesh Singh:* See [mapping EAA - EPUB Accessibility Guidelines](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1JrhCkrcjl3BQKAiSqfRK0URO5gZYHy8LGVZBo_SFW8w/edit#gid=0).

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html](https://w3c.github.io/epub-specs/epub33/a11y/index.html)

**Avneesh Singh:** luc, gregorio and christina have done a lot of this work for us  
… what we need to do today is to evaluate whether the current spec is able to meet the EUAA, and whether we need to make some improvements to our spec  
… are there any ambiguities that we need to clarify in the spreadsheet?  
… and what is our plan going forward?  

**Luc Audrain:** the EUAA is about products and services  
… prods are mainly hardware (devices, machines, something that has a physical aspect)  
… services are more digital  
… in this case we are concerned about ebooks as services  
… the prods side is more for people building and selling ereaders  
… but it is clear that the ebooks themselves are governed by the services part  
… the services sold starting 2025 will need to comply (as long as those services are sold in EU countries)  
… the EUAA takes its principles from existing accessibility standards  
… the EUAA is divided into several sections (1 about products, 2 about specific products, 3 about means of providing services (generic), 4 is about specific services)  
… 4f is specifically about ebooks  
… and ebook content  
… gregorio has worked on the mapping from these section 3 and 4f to our spec  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** the spreadsheet > 1st col is about content creators, 2nd is about RS, 3 is about distribution channels  
… since EUAA are connected to WCAG, we added links directly to the related sections of WCAG that apply to the corresponding EUAA section  
… we found that there are no pieces missing from the spec  
… but some areas require more investigation  
… one of these is about MO  
… the EUAA requires that if there is audio, then audio must be sync with text  
… in spec, this is not mandatory  
… also, spec allows for use of both WCAG A and AA  
… might be that only AA meets EUAA  
… also, we must think about DRM and RS features such as enlarging text, and changing spacing of text that are the law, but not necessarily part of the spec  

**George Kerscher:** is an epub that can be loaded on multiple different RS a prod or a service?  

**Luc Audrain:** that would be a service  

**George Kerscher:** with audiobooks, does the act specify that a stand alone audiobook with no text is not allowed?  

**Luc Audrain:** there is absolutely no mention of audiobooks in the act  
… not a single occurrence of this word  
… they only talk about the audio of the text (i.e. in an ebook)  
… we could say that this act doesn't cover single audiobook services  

**George Kerscher:** this fits with our notion of an optimised publication  
… can you explain the difference between the 2 sheets in the workbook?  

**Luc Audrain:** sheet 1 is about the specific requirements applying to ebooks (i.e. 4f)  
… sheet 2 is about the generic requirements (i.e. section 3)  
… section 3 is mainly about the ecosystem around the provision of the service  
… e.g. b is about the documentation around the service  
… e.g. c is about making websites (whether mobile or traditional browser) that website must be accessible  
… e.g. d says that related services like helpdesk, that must also be accessible  
… these very generic methods relate to all services, like transportation, banking  
… of course these are important for our purposes, but they don't relate directly to ebooks  

**Wendy Reid:** I was at the accessibility action group meeting for british publishers this morning  
… there was a lot of confusion about standards  
… and about DRM's impact on a11y tech  
… EUAA doesn't really seem to address the DRM question  
… also, there is recurring confusion about difference between audiobooks, epubs with MO, and TTS as a user agent feature  
… we should clarify that if your book is being read on RS with TTS, that has nothing to do with the author  
… where as if you provide audio in your ebook, then you can use MO  
… and audiobooks are completely separate from the above two categories  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** we should check the epub requirements against ISO standards  
… we also suspect that the EUAA will be format agnostic  
… e.g. no preference for epub, or for a specific version of epub spec  
… the spec only requires that any DRM used not impede accessibility  
… but checking this would be a responsibility of the retailer  
… publisher often does not control this  
… also, if you have ebook and audiobooks, you are not required to combine these in order to meet the EUAA requirements  
… especially as the rights to these formats might be split between different parties  
… BUT if an author does combine text and audio in the same book, then it must be done in an accessible way  
… as far as I know, the majority of audiobooks are not produced by publishers  
… we should keep that in mind  

**Wendy Reid:** the rights question is probably fueling some of the confusion  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** there is some fear that TTS will infringe the rights of the audiobook holder, but this is something we can manage  
… we can explain that TTS is different  

**Avneesh Singh:** just to clarify, there is no requirement in the spec that if you have text, you must have audio  

**Ben Schroeter:** re. discoverability, when we say that there are requirements on the distributor to include an ONIX codelist value  
… are we saying that this is a retailer responsibility?  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** when the retailer takes the ONIX feed, it maybe useful for the retailer to include that information on their website  
… the commission originally suggested some kind of leaflet to accompany the ebooks, but we explain that we already have metadata that travels along with the ebook  

**Ben Schroeter:** so basically its not a requirement for distributors  
… just one way for that requirement to be fulfilled  

**Luc Audrain:** there is a requirement for displaying accessibility metadata if the publisher produces some  
… in section 3  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** we are working to mainstream accessibility content  
… part of this is to make sure people are aware of whether the products they buy fit their requirements (in so far as a11y)  

> *Avneesh Singh:* (vi) ensuring that digital rights management measures do not block accessibility features.

**George Kerscher:** in the early days of ebooks, nothing was accessible and DRM blocked assistive tech  
… this resolves those concerns  
… also great that it clarifies that DRM cannot be used as a reason to block a11y tech  
… also this applies to libraries, correct?  

**Avneesh Singh:** Yes  
… also, we originally had language in the a11y spec specifically saying that DRM cannot block accessibility, but this was removed to conform with ISO  
… should we put this back?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** for A vs AA, we need to check our spec to see which level each of these correspond to, and to see if they meet the minimum requirements of the EUAA  

**Avneesh Singh:** re. the requirement in the EUAA that if you have audio in your ebook, that you must use MO. The a11y spec doesn't make a parallel requirement right now  

**Matt Garrish:** right, we don't require use of MO  
… only that if you do choose to use MO, we prescribe the way to do it  
… but I don't have any specific proposals right now  

**George Kerscher:** if there is a podcast inserted into a book with a text transcript,  
… e.g. in a details element below the element  
… is that sufficient synchronization?  
… or does the EUAA require synchronization at the sentence or paragraph level?  

**Avneesh Singh:** can we get back to the EU about clarification of the requirements, instead of making the epub spec more rigid?  

**Luc Audrain:** the text of the EUAA won't really change at this point  
… the language is generic, if there is both text and audio in the act, then the act applies  
… but there is no requirement as to the level of synchronization  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** there is also the idea of giving the user the choice as to the level of synchronization, but the act doesn't go into such detail  
… but I suspect that the number of books that include both text and audio is quite small  
… our focus should be getting publishers to make their text based books accessible  

**Wendy Reid:** i would guess the number of books that have both text and audio is < 5%  

**Luc Audrain:** clarification, the EUAA is referring to cases where the audio in question is the audio _of the text_  
… background music, for example, would not be included  

**George Kerscher:** are there any references to alternative languages in the EUAA?  

**Gregorio Pellegrino:** not specifically, other than the WCAG requirement that the content be understandable  

**Matt Garrish:** in the spec, we could bump the SHOULD meet the requirements of the MO spec to MUST  

> *Avneesh Singh:* (vi) ensuring that digital rights management measures do not block accessibility features.

**Avneesh Singh:** about the DRM question, in the original spec section 8 specified that if you use DRM it shouldn't block a11y  
… because of ISO, we made this section an informative note  
… should be put it back in light of EUAA?  

**Matt Garrish:** i don't see why I can't put it back as a requirement  
… ISO considered it out of scope  
… that's the only concern, that we'd run into the same issue if we want to go the ISO route again  

**Avneesh Singh:** we might be able to discuss how exactly we want to implement this in another call (whether to leave it as an informative section, or otherwise)  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** it is really the distributor has controls the DRM question, authors have little controls over this  
… we should clarify this, and also not have a preference for a specific form of DRM over another  

**Luc Audrain:** echoing George's opinion that we should elevate the requirement that DRM not impede accessibility a MUST requirement  

**Avneesh Singh:** the group's recommendation is to make this a MUST, mgarrish and I will discuss the implementation  
… everyone should go through the spreadsheet and open issues where you have questions  
… gpellegrino and luc will respond  
… we are also moving towards a FPWD in Feb  
… mgarrish and I will discuss what will be included in that FPWD  
… what we can put in about the EUAA, we will  
… we also talked about creating a document with this mapping that we will submit to representatives of the EU  

**Cristina Mussinelli:** i don't think the EU would understand a spreadsheet like that  
… we need a non-technical version  
… luc, gpellegrino and I will consider the best way to present this to the commission  
… what about changing the name of the spec?  

**Avneesh Singh:** yes, there was some discussion about this last year, but we can't discuss this on the remainder of this call  
… this is a very deep topic  
… shame that we have to end the call now  

**Wendy Reid:** we're hoping that we can get an overview of this topic in the epub 3 spec WG call tomorrow  

---
